

Exxon Mobil Profit Falls for a Fourth Straight Quarter












Give this article














The Exxon Mobil refinery in Torrance, Calif. Production volumes fell, but earnings still beat expectations because of cost-cutting and rising natural gas prices.

The Exxon Mobil refinery in Torrance, Calif. Production volumes fell, but earnings still beat expectations because of cost-cutting and rising natural gas prices.Credit...Reed Saxon/Associated Press





By Clifford Krauss
May 1, 2014




HOUSTON — For the fourth quarter in a row, Exxon Mobil on Thursday reported lower year-over-year profit because of falling production volumes and disappointing earnings from its international refining and chemicals businesses.

But analysts said the results exceeded expectations in large part because the company succeeded in cutting costs, particularly in exploration for oil and gas, which helped increase profitability. Rising natural gas prices in the United States, largely a result of a cold winter, also helped Exxon Mobil, which is the largest domestic natural gas producer.

The company, like several of the other international majors, continues to struggle to keep production up even as smaller independent companies are benefiting more from the drilling boom across the shale oil and gas fields of North Dakota and Texas. Exxon Mobil’s oil and gas production declined 5.6 percent compared with a year ago.




Exxon Mobil is heavily invested in Russia, adding to concerns about its ability to expand in the future should Western sanctions tighten in response to Russian policies toward Ukraine. Nevertheless, the company raised its quarterly dividend by 10 percent on Wednesday. 




“The company is off to a good start in 2014,” said Brian M. Youngberg, senior energy analyst at Edward Jones. “Oil volumes held up better and were more in line with expectations. However, volumes continued their downward trend over all, and we continue to doubt the company can attain its goal of keeping volumes flat in 2014 relative to 2013 and then grow beginning in 2015.”



Read More About Oil and Gas Prices
•Prices Drop: U.S. gas prices have been on the decline, offering some relief to drivers. But weather, war and demand will influence how long it lasts.
•Stock Market: As financial markets around the world fell this spring amid worries about inflation and rising interest rates, energy was the only sector gaining ground. 
•Summer Driving Season: The spike in gas prices is being driven in part by vacationers hitting the road. Here’s what our reporter saw on a recent trip.
•Gas Tax Holiday: President Biden called on Congress to temporarily suspend the federal gas tax, but experts remain skeptical the move would benefit consumers much, because tax is such a small percentage of the price you pay at the pump..

Mr. Youngberg noted that the last quarter in which Exxon Mobil showed improving profits was the first quarter of last year. Still, he added, if the company “can improve earnings per barrel without growth, investors will likely be accepting of that.”

Exxon Mobil, based in Irving, Texas, and still the largest domestic oil company, reported first-quarter net income of $9.1 billion, reduced from $9.5 billion a year ago. Revenue eased slightly to $106.8 billion, from $108.8 billion a year ago.

The major reason for the drop in oil production was the expiration in January of a decades-old extraction agreement with Abu Dhabi that had made Exxon Mobil, along with BP, Royal Dutch Shell and Total, a partner with the Abu Dhabi National Oil Company in pumping oil in the United Arab Emirates. If it were not for the expiration of the Abu Dhabi deal, Exxon Mobil’s oil production would have risen slightly.




Despite the lackluster results, there were bright spots. The company managed to cut its capital and exploration costs by 28 percent, bolstering its reputation as one of the most disciplined companies in the global oil patch.




“Exxon Mobil’s first-quarter earnings and cash flow reflect the company’s continuing focus on delivering profitable growth and creating long-term shareholder value,” Rex W. Tillerson, the company’s chief executive, said in a statement.

Company executives continue to express optimism that they can ramp up profitable oil and gas production over the next few years with help from projects in Argentina, Papua New Guinea, Tanzania, Malaysia, Indonesia and Russia. In a conference call, David S. Rosenthal, Exxon Mobil’s vice president for investor relations, noted that the expansion of the giant Kearl oil sands mining project in Canada was ahead of schedule and said production was generally rising in projects with higher profit margins.

Discussing Russia — where Exxon Mobil is a partner with Rosneft, whose chairman, Igor I. Sechin, is on a new United States sanctions list — Mr. Rosenthal said, “We will comply with all sanctions.” But, he added, “all of the activities we planned for this year are underway and proceeding to plan.”

Oil companies have reported mixed results so far this earnings season. Weakening refining margins, lower production and higher costs for labor and equipment have hurt the profits of several large companies, including BP. On Thursday, ConocoPhillips reported a slight dip in earnings for the quarter, $2.12 billion, down from $2.14 billion, although its revenue increased by nearly 10 percent. Profit for the refining giant Phillips 66 grew by 12 percent for the quarter, with strong growth in its pipeline and chemical businesses.

Oil executives say their profits are pinched because they are forced to operate in deep oceans and remote places like the Arctic to keep up with production, as many fields around the world age and produce less oil. Oil prices have been fairly flat in recent years.

“The international oil companies have a global challenge with cost levels now that the easy barrels are gone,” said Stale Tungesvik, chief executive for Canadian operations of the Norwegian oil giant Statoil. He added that if current trends continue, “we will not be able to compete for capital and talent because we need to be more profitable to be more attractive.”
