Exxon Mobil puts Ukraine gas
prospect on hold
Exxon Mobil Chairman and CEO Rex Tillerson (left) and Russian President Vladimir Putin (right) attended the signing of an agreement
between state-controlled Russian oil company Rosneft and Exxon Mobil at a port on the Black Sea in 2012. ( File - Presse )
By dallasnews Administrator
9:18 PM on Mar 5, 2014 CST
Exxon Mobil Corp. has put its Ukraine offshore natural gas prospect on hold because of the political
situation there, company officials told analysts Wednesday.
But Exxon is pressing ahead with large-scale investments in Russia, as well as a Black Sea oil project just
east of Crimea, they said.
Dallas police shoot armed woman after
several shots fired inside Love Field airport
Dallas Love Field reopens after shooting,
but most flights canceled or delayed
What we know about the shoot
Field airport
MORE FROM HOMEPAGE
Listen to this article now 1.0✕
Powered by Trinity Audio
--:-- --:--
10 10
Sign In
SUBSCRIBE NOW $1 for 3 months
7/25/22, 6:04 PM Exxon Mobil puts Ukraine gas prospect on hold
https://www.dallasnews.com/business/energy/2014/03/06/exxon-mobil-puts-ukraine-gas-prospect-on-hold/ 2/4
Exxon Mobil and Royal Dutch Shell are heading a group selected in 2012 to explore for gas off Ukraine’s
western Black Sea coast in an area called Skifska. Negotiations on a production-sharing agreement with
the Ukrainian government were underway in the weeks before street battles with government opponents
led the country’s president to flee to Russia.
Russian military forces then seized control of Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula, prompting U.S. and European
officials to talk of economic sanctions against Moscow.
Exxon Mobil senior vice president Andrew Swiger told an analysts meeting in New York that the company
was continuing its license in Skifska but that the project was “on hold due to current circumstances.”
Rex Tillerson, Exxon Mobil’s chairman and CEO, said the company’s Russian projects were moving ahead.
“As for the current situation, obviously it’s early days,” he said. “There’s been no impact on any activities
or plans at this point, nor would we expect there to be any, barring governments taking steps beyond our
control.
“In terms of our view of country risk, geopolitical risk, other than things like sanctions, we don’t see any
new challenges out of the current situation,” he said.
Exxon Mobil signed a giant joint venture agreement with Russia’s Rosneft in 2011 that opened the way for
exploration in seven Russian Arctic Sea areas, parts of Western Siberia and a strip along the Russian Black
Sea near Crimea.
Swiger said Wednesday that drilling was expected to begin in the Russian Black Sea prospect either later
this year or in 2015. He said the prospect was promising because of natural oil seeps and seismic work that
showed several potential oil-bearing areas stacked on top of one another.
Ukrainian officials hope the Skifska offshore area will help it lessen dependence on Russian natural gas.
Government estimates indicate the project would cost about $10 billion to $12 billion. So far, no drilling
has taken place in the Skifska area, although Exxon Mobil has found natural gas in the Black Sea off the
neighboring coast of Romania.
SPONSORED CONTENT
When You Eat Oatmeal Every Day, This Is What Happens 
BY
Sign In
SUBSCRIBE NOW $1 for 3 months
7/25/22, 6:04 PM Exxon Mobil puts Ukraine gas prospect on hold
https://www.dallasnews.com/business/energy/2014/03/06/exxon-mobil-puts-ukraine-gas-prospect-on-hold/ 3/4
During Wednesday’s meeting with analysts, held at the New York Stock Exchange, Tillerson emphasized
that Exxon Mobil’s holdings were spread across the world in such a way that it could withstand
geopolitical or other disruptions in any one country.
“It is difficult to compete and be successful without the scale and capacities that organizations like us have,
and to manage the risks,” he said in answering a question about whether the “supermajor” oil companies
have grown too large.
Tillerson said Exxon Mobil is cutting back on capital investments this year and expects to keep below the
2013 level out to 2017. Even with that, the company plans to spend $39.8 billion in 2014.
Follow Jim Landers on Twitter at @landersjim.