Exxon Mobil says 2011 earnings up 35 percent
 Email Share Share Tweet
 Print Order Reprints
Exxon Mobil said that fourth quarter profit was up 2 percent in the fourth quarter.
Enlarge
Exxon Mobil said that fourth quarter profit was up 2 percent in the fourth quarter.
IN THIS ARTICLE

Rex Tillerson
Person

By Lance Murray
Jan 31, 2012
Exxon Mobil Corp. reported fourth quarter earnings were up 2 percent to $9.4 billion, with full year 2011 earnings of $41.1 billion -- up 35 percent from 2010.

The Irving-based oil and gas company said the results reflected "higher crude oil and natural gas realizations, improved refining and chemical margins, and gains on asset sales.”

The company's earnings results reflected $1.97 per share for the quarter, up from $1.85 per share in the same period of 2010.

“Exxon Mobil recorded strong results while investing at record levels to develop new supplies of energy that are critical to meeting growing world demand, and supporting economic recovery and growth," Exxon Mobil Chairman Rex Tillerson said.

On Monday, Exxon Mobil announced that was selling its Japanese refining business to its local partner in a deal valued at $3.9 billion.

Exxon said it was trying to focus more on higher-margin operations such as exploration and production in announcing the sale of the Japanese retail and refining operation to TonenGeneral Sekiyu KK.

Here are some other highlights from Exxon Mobil's earnings statement:

Capital and exploration expenditures were $10 billion, which was consistent with the fourth quarter of 2010
Oil-equivalent production decreased 9 percent from the fourth quarter of 2010, but the company said excluding the impacts of entitlement volumes, OPEC quota effects and divestitures, production was down 4 percent.
Cash flow from operations and asset sales was $17.6 billion.
The purchase of shares to reduce shares outstanding was $5 billion.
Exxon Mobil was high bidder on 50 blocks in the most recent U.S. Gulf of Mexico lease sale