This could be Exxon Mobil’s biggest threat
PUBLISHED SUN, OCT 20 20131:00 PM EDTUPDATED TUE, OCT 22 201310:56 AM EDT
thumbnail
Eric Rosenbaum
@ERPROSE
SHARE
Share Article via Facebook
Share Article via Twitter
Share Article via LinkedIn
Share Article via Email
"More of the same, and a lot of it," says CFRA Research energy analyst Stewart Glickman of a newly unveiled plan from Exxon Mobil to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions. But Glickman, and others analysts even more critical of Exxon, say there is a logic and consistency to the oil giant's position that was reiterated on Monday.
“More of the same, and a lot of it,” says CFRA Research energy analyst Stewart Glickman of a newly unveiled plan from Exxon Mobil to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions. But Glickman, and others analysts even more critical of Exxon, say there is a logic and consistency to the oil giant’s position that was reiterated on Monday.
Source: ExxonMobil
In a speech last week, the Secretary General of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) had a message for oil and gas investors: Their biggest risk isn’t a spill or a blowout or a storm. And for countries deriving a large portion of revenue from oil and gas, it isn’t the U.S. shale boom’s competing with OPEC.

Rather, it is stranded assets in a carbon-entangled world, according to OECD Secretary General Angel Gurría.

It’s also the biggest risk for any investor exposed to fossil fuels. The Asset Owners Disclosure Project estimates that an average 55 percent of pension fund portfolios are in high-carbon assets or sectors with major exposure to that sector.

Stocks in companies such as Exxon Mobil and BP are staples of such portfolios because of their slow-growth, dividend-rich profile, yet few investors ever consider those companies’ having to write off assets as “stranded” underground.

“The looming choice may be either stranding those assets or stranding the planet,” Gurría said.

(Read more: Rich kids and their Greenpeace portfolios)

Though his speech made news, Ben Caldecott, who runs the Stranded Assets program at Oxford University’s Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, said the topic wasn’t new.

“Stranded asset risk has been quickly introduced to mainstream investors, and people are starting to understand the issues,” he said.

Understanding doesn’t mean embracing the idea in investment valuation and analysis, though.

“The reality is that corporations and investors don’t have very much foresight on these issues,” Caldecott said. “They misprice these risks and don’t generally incorporate them into decision-making. Very few parts in the investment chain are factoring in these issues.”

Gurría’s remarks ask the audience to imagine Exxon Mobil, sitting on 40 gigatons of hydrocarbons by some estimates—the company says it has a total resource base of 87 billion barrels of oil equivalent—having to write off projects around the world. Exxon Mobil is in involved in an increasingly far-flung dash for new resources, which are increasingly more expensive and dangerous to extract, and investors complain about the lack of production growth from the largest U.S. oil company.

In addition, he said, OECD governments make about $200 billion annually from oil and gas. Russia gets about $150 billion a year, or 28 percent of total government revenues, while OPEC countries revenues total $600 billion to $700 billion a year.

This “carbon entanglement” not only is a threat to the global economy but is a primary reason it is so difficult to move the world away from carbon, Gurría said.

“Stranded assets are now being talked about by major opinion makers like the OECD,” said Michael Lazarus, senior scientist at the Stockholm Environment Institute. Sovereign wealth funds, governments and investors are “really not preparing to strand assets—they’re doing the exact opposite.”

(Read more: Libya could become an oil paradise: Eni)

Exxon Mobil spokesman Alan Jeffers referred questions about carbon risk to the disclosure within the company’s annual 10-K about greenhouse gas emissions.

When asked about how it related to stranded assets, Jeffers said, “Our risk factors are not specific to the concept of stranded carbon assets, but every credible energy outlook indicates that fossil fuels make up the majority of energy demand for the foreseeable future. ... Energy needs and environmental needs have to balanced ... but there’s no technology available today that will replace oil, gas and coal.”

European majors BP and Royal Dutch Shell have spoken publicly about performing carbon price analysis on their operations. The general outlook in Exxon, Shell and BP’s long-term global energy forecasts is that the biggest result of the carbon challenge will be greater reliance on natural gas.

Caldecott said the past five to ten years in the energy markets has shown that those betting on their ability to predict the future of the energy market decades out may be the ones engaging in wishful thinking.

In fact, Gurría addressed the status quo energy outlook in his speech.

“For heavily coal-dependent countries, a switch to shale gas can reduce the carbon intensity of power generation [as in the USA],” he said. “This is an improvement from a climate perspective. ... It will mean lower emissions, but not no emissions. The question then becomes: How do you ensure that gas is a transitional step toward an eventual goal of zero emissions? If we invest too much in dedicated pipelines and other infrastructure, the transition risks becoming a new and permanent dependency.”

ConocoPhillips declined to comment. Chevron and BP did not respond to requests for comment.